README.md, before:

# obs-memory — Persistent Agent Memory via Obsidian

Give your coding agent persistent memory across sessions using an [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md) knowledge vault.

Your agent automatically orients itself at session start, navigates project architecture through graph traversal, writes discoveries back to the vault, and can be commanded to create session summaries, scaffold projects, search vault knowledge, and manage component relationships.

Works with **any agent** that supports the [Agent Skills](https://agentskills.io) specification — Claude Code, Cursor, Cline, Windsurf, GitHub Copilot, and [35+ more](https://agentskills.io/compatible-products).

## Features

- **Automatic session orientation** — reads TODOs + project overview at session start without being asked
- **CLI-first graph traversal** — uses Obsidian CLI for property reads, backlinks, links, tags, and search before falling back to file reads
- **Bidirectional relationships** — `relate` command manages `depends-on`/`depended-on-by`, `extends`/`extended-by`, `implements`/`implemented-by`, `consumes`/`consumed-by` with BFS tree walking
- **Structured lookups** — `lookup` subcommands for deps, consumers, related notes, type/layer filtering, key files, and freetext search
- **Automatic behaviors** — session end detection, component discovery offers, first-run guidance
- **Token-optimized** — frontmatter-first scanning, CLI over file reads, scoped navigation

## Installation

### Via skills.sh (recommended)

```bash
npx skills add adamtylerlynch/obsidian-agent-memory-skills
```

This installs the skill for your agent and makes it available immediately.

### Via Claude Code plugin (Claude Code only)

```bash
git clone https://github.com/adamtylerlynch/obsidian-agent-memory-skills.git \
  ~/.claude/plugins/cache/obs-memory

# Or symlink from a local checkout
ln -s /path/to/obsidian-agent-memory-skills ~/.claude/plugins/cache/obs-memory
```

### Initialize the vault

Once installed, ask your agent to initialize the vault:

```
Initialize my Obsidian memory vault
```

Or in Claude Code:

```
/obs init
```

Or use the setup script directly:

```bash
./setup.sh ~/Documents/AgentMemory
```

This creates the vault with the required structure, templates, and Obsidian configuration. If you're in a git repo, `init` will also auto-scaffold the current project. Then open the vault folder in Obsidian.

### Vault path configuration

The skill resolves your vault path automatically:

1. `OBSIDIAN_VAULT_PATH` environment variable (highest priority)
2. Path parsed from agent config (looks for "Obsidian Knowledge Vault" section)
3. `~/Documents/AgentMemory` (default)

To set the environment variable, add to your shell profile:
```bash
export OBSIDIAN_VAULT_PATH="$HOME/Documents/AgentMemory"
```

## What's Included

### Proactive Skill: `obs-memory`

Loaded automatically when the agent detects vault-relevant context. Handles:

- **Session start orientation** — reads TODOs + project overview (2 files max)
- **Project auto-detection** — matches git repo name to vault projects
- **Graph navigation** — follows wikilinks on demand, never bulk-reads
- **Knowledge writing** — creates component notes, ADRs, patterns, domain knowledge
- **Relationship management** — bidirectional dependency tracking with BFS tree walking
- **Token optimization** — frontmatter-first scanning, CLI lookups, scoped reads

### Automatic Behaviors

These work without explicit commands:

- **Session start**: Auto-orients from the vault (TODOs + project overview)
- **Session end signals**: When you say "done" or "wrapping up", offers to write a session summary
- **Component discovery**: When the agent deeply analyzes an undocumented component, offers to create a vault note
- **First run**: Guides through `init` and auto-scaffolds the current project

### Commands

| Command | Description |
|---|---|
| `init [path]` | Initialize a new vault from the bundled template |
| `recap` | Write a session summary from git history, update TODOs |
| `project [name]` | Scaffold a new project in the vault |
| `note component [name]` | Create a component note from template |
| `note adr [title]` | Create an architecture decision record |
| `note pattern [name]` | Create a pattern note |
| `todo [action]` | View and update project TODOs |
| `lookup deps <name>` | Query what a component depends on |
| `lookup consumers <name>` | Query reverse dependencies |
| `lookup related <name>` | All connected notes (both directions) |
| `lookup type <type> [project]` | Find notes by type |
| `lookup layer <layer> [project]` | Find components by architectural layer |
| `lookup files <component>` | Key files for a component |
| `lookup <freetext>` | General vault search |
| `relate <source> <target> [type]` | Create a bidirectional relationship |
| `relate show <name>` | Display all relationships for a note |
| `relate tree <name> [depth]` | BFS walk of the dependency tree |

In Claude Code, these are available as `/obs <command>`. In other agents, use natural language (e.g., "write a session summary to the vault").

## Agent Compatibility

| Agent | How it works |
|---|---|
| **Claude Code** | Full support — proactive skill + `/obs` slash command |
| **Cursor** | Skill loaded via skills.sh, responds to natural language commands |
| **Cline** | Skill loaded via skills.sh, responds to natural language commands |
| **Windsurf** | Skill loaded via skills.sh, responds to natural language commands |
| **GitHub Copilot** | Skill loaded via skills.sh, responds to natural language commands |
| **Others** | Any agent supporting [Agent Skills spec](https://agentskills.io/specification) |

For agents without skills.sh support, you can manually add the contents of `skills/obs-memory/SKILL.md` to your agent's instructions file (e.g., `.cursorrules`, `.windsurfrules`, `.clinerules`).

## Usage Examples

### Automatic orientation (proactive)

Start a session in any project directory. If the project has notes in the vault, the agent will automatically:
1. Read your active TODOs
2. Read the project overview
3. Have full context about architecture, components, and patterns

### End-of-session summary

Ask your agent to write a session summary (or use `/obs recap` in Claude Code). The agent examines your git log and diffs, writes a session note, and updates your TODOs.

### Scaffold a new project

Ask the agent to create a project in your vault (or use `/obs project my-app` in Claude Code). Creates:
```
projects/my-app/
├── my-app.md          # Project overview (auto-filled)
├── architecture/
├── components/
└── patterns/
```

### Search vault knowledge

Ask the agent to search your vault for a topic (or use `/obs lookup PKCS12` in Claude Code). Searches across all notes, showing matches with frontmatter context.
Ask the agent to search your vault (or use `/obs lookup PKCS12` in Claude Code). Supports targeted subcommands:
```
/obs lookup deps AuthMiddleware        # What does it depend on?
/obs lookup consumers AuthMiddleware   # What depends on it?
/obs lookup type component my-app      # All components in a project
/obs lookup layer api                  # All API-layer components
```

### Manage relationships

Track dependencies between components (or use `/obs relate` in Claude Code):
```
/obs relate AuthMiddleware SessionStore              # depends-on (default)
/obs relate AuthMiddleware OAuth2Provider implements  # implements relationship
/obs relate show AuthMiddleware                       # View all relationships
/obs relate tree AuthMiddleware 3                     # Dependency tree, depth 3
```

## How It Works

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ Session Start                                    │
│   Agent reads: TODOs → Project Overview          │
│   (2 files, ~100 lines — minimal token cost)     │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ During Work                                      │
│   Project Overview ──link──→ Component Note      │
│        │                         │               │
│        └──link──→ Pattern   ──link──→ Domain     │
│                    Note             Knowledge     │
│   Agent follows links ON DEMAND                  │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ Session End                                      │
│   Agent writes: Session summary, updates TODOs,  │
│   creates/updates component and pattern notes    │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Vault Structure

The vault is initialized with this structure:

```
AgentMemory/
├── Home.md                           # Dashboard
├── projects/
│   ├── Projects.md                   # Project index
│   └── {name}/
│       ├── {name}.md                 # Project overview — agent starts here
│       ├── architecture/             # ADRs and design decisions
│       ├── components/               # Per-component notes
│       └── patterns/                 # Project-specific patterns
├── domains/
│   ├── Domains.md                    # Domain index
│   └── {tech}/                       # Cross-project knowledge
├── patterns/
│   └── Universal Patterns.md         # Language-agnostic patterns
├── sessions/
│   └── Session Log.md                # Session chronology
├── todos/
│   └── Active TODOs.md               # Current work items
├── templates/                        # Note templates
│   ├── Project.md
│   ├── Component Note.md
│   ├── Session Note.md
│   └── Architecture Decision.md
└── inbox/                            # Unsorted
```

## Package Contents

```
obsidian-agent-memory-skills/
├── .claude-plugin/
│   └── plugin.json                   # Plugin metadata (Claude Code + skills.sh)
├── skills/
│   └── obs-memory/
│       └── SKILL.md                  # Agent-agnostic skill definition (source of truth)
├── commands/
│   └── obs.md                        # Claude Code slash command (/obs)
├── vault-template/                   # Bundled vault template
│   ├── Home.md
│   ├── projects/Projects.md
│   ├── domains/Domains.md
│   ├── patterns/Universal Patterns.md
│   ├── sessions/Session Log.md
│   ├── todos/Active TODOs.md
│   └── templates/
│       ├── Project.md
│       ├── Component Note.md
│       ├── Session Note.md
│       └── Architecture Decision.md
├── setup.sh                          # Shell-based vault setup
└── examples/
    └── populated-vault.md            # Example of a vault after real use
```

## License

MIT

Commit message:

Add /obs analyze command for project-to-vault hydration
Adds a new `analyze` subcommand that scans the current repo for
knowledge sources (CLAUDE.md, README, ADRs, package manifests, CI
configs), analyzes project structure, and writes populated vault
notes — project overview, components, patterns, ADR imports, and
domain links — with idempotency to preserve existing manual work.

README.md, after:

# obs-memory — Persistent Agent Memory via Obsidian

Give your coding agent persistent memory across sessions using an [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md) knowledge vault.

Your agent automatically orients itself at session start, navigates project architecture through graph traversal, writes discoveries back to the vault, and can be commanded to create session summaries, scaffold projects, search vault knowledge, and manage component relationships.

Works with **any agent** that supports the [Agent Skills](https://agentskills.io) specification — Claude Code, Cursor, Cline, Windsurf, GitHub Copilot, and [35+ more](https://agentskills.io/compatible-products).

## Features

- **Automatic session orientation** — reads TODOs + project overview at session start without being asked
- **CLI-first graph traversal** — uses Obsidian CLI for property reads, backlinks, links, tags, and search before falling back to file reads
- **Bidirectional relationships** — `relate` command manages `depends-on`/`depended-on-by`, `extends`/`extended-by`, `implements`/`implemented-by`, `consumes`/`consumed-by` with BFS tree walking
- **Structured lookups** — `lookup` subcommands for deps, consumers, related notes, type/layer filtering, key files, and freetext search
- **Automatic behaviors** — session end detection, component discovery offers, first-run guidance
- **Project analysis** — `analyze` command scans your repo and hydrates the vault with populated notes from README, CLAUDE.md, ADRs, and source structure
- **Token-optimized** — frontmatter-first scanning, CLI over file reads, scoped navigation

## Installation

### Via skills.sh (recommended)

```bash
npx skills add adamtylerlynch/obsidian-agent-memory-skills
```

This installs the skill for your agent and makes it available immediately.

### Via Claude Code plugin (Claude Code only)

```bash
git clone https://github.com/adamtylerlynch/obsidian-agent-memory-skills.git \
  ~/.claude/plugins/cache/obs-memory

# Or symlink from a local checkout
ln -s /path/to/obsidian-agent-memory-skills ~/.claude/plugins/cache/obs-memory
```

### Initialize the vault

Once installed, ask your agent to initialize the vault:

```
Initialize my Obsidian memory vault
```

Or in Claude Code:

```
/obs init
```

Or use the setup script directly:

```bash
./setup.sh ~/Documents/AgentMemory
```

This creates the vault with the required structure, templates, and Obsidian configuration. If you're in a git repo, `init` will also auto-scaffold the current project. Then open the vault folder in Obsidian.

### Vault path configuration

The skill resolves your vault path automatically:

1. `OBSIDIAN_VAULT_PATH` environment variable (highest priority)
2. Path parsed from agent config (looks for "Obsidian Knowledge Vault" section)
3. `~/Documents/AgentMemory` (default)

To set the environment variable, add to your shell profile:
```bash
export OBSIDIAN_VAULT_PATH="$HOME/Documents/AgentMemory"
```

## What's Included

### Proactive Skill: `obs-memory`

Loaded automatically when the agent detects vault-relevant context. Handles:

- **Session start orientation** — reads TODOs + project overview (2 files max)
- **Project auto-detection** — matches git repo name to vault projects
- **Graph navigation** — follows wikilinks on demand, never bulk-reads
- **Knowledge writing** — creates component notes, ADRs, patterns, domain knowledge
- **Relationship management** — bidirectional dependency tracking with BFS tree walking
- **Token optimization** — frontmatter-first scanning, CLI lookups, scoped reads

### Automatic Behaviors

These work without explicit commands:

- **Session start**: Auto-orients from the vault (TODOs + project overview)
- **Session end signals**: When you say "done" or "wrapping up", offers to write a session summary
- **Component discovery**: When the agent deeply analyzes an undocumented component, offers to create a vault note
- **First run**: Guides through `init` and auto-scaffolds the current project

### Commands

| Command | Description |
|---|---|
| `init [path]` | Initialize a new vault from the bundled template |
| `analyze` | Analyze the current project and hydrate the vault with populated notes |
| `recap` | Write a session summary from git history, update TODOs |
| `project [name]` | Scaffold a new (empty) project in the vault |
| `note component [name]` | Create a component note from template |
| `note adr [title]` | Create an architecture decision record |
| `note pattern [name]` | Create a pattern note |
| `todo [action]` | View and update project TODOs |
| `lookup deps <name>` | Query what a component depends on |
| `lookup consumers <name>` | Query reverse dependencies |
| `lookup related <name>` | All connected notes (both directions) |
| `lookup type <type> [project]` | Find notes by type |
| `lookup layer <layer> [project]` | Find components by architectural layer |
| `lookup files <component>` | Key files for a component |
| `lookup <freetext>` | General vault search |
| `relate <source> <target> [type]` | Create a bidirectional relationship |
| `relate show <name>` | Display all relationships for a note |
| `relate tree <name> [depth]` | BFS walk of the dependency tree |

In Claude Code, these are available as `/obs <command>`. In other agents, use natural language (e.g., "write a session summary to the vault").

## Agent Compatibility

| Agent | How it works |
|---|---|
| **Claude Code** | Full support — proactive skill + `/obs` slash command |
| **Cursor** | Skill loaded via skills.sh, responds to natural language commands |
| **Cline** | Skill loaded via skills.sh, responds to natural language commands |
| **Windsurf** | Skill loaded via skills.sh, responds to natural language commands |
| **GitHub Copilot** | Skill loaded via skills.sh, responds to natural language commands |
| **Others** | Any agent supporting [Agent Skills spec](https://agentskills.io/specification) |

For agents without skills.sh support, you can manually add the contents of `skills/obs-memory/SKILL.md` to your agent's instructions file (e.g., `.cursorrules`, `.windsurfrules`, `.clinerules`).

## Usage Examples

### Automatic orientation (proactive)

Start a session in any project directory. If the project has notes in the vault, the agent will automatically:
1. Read your active TODOs
2. Read the project overview
3. Have full context about architecture, components, and patterns

### End-of-session summary

Ask your agent to write a session summary (or use `/obs recap` in Claude Code). The agent examines your git log and diffs, writes a session note, and updates your TODOs.

### Scaffold a new project

Ask the agent to create a project in your vault (or use `/obs project my-app` in Claude Code). Creates an empty scaffold:
```
projects/my-app/
├── my-app.md          # Project overview (placeholder sections)
├── architecture/
├── components/
└── patterns/
```

### Analyze a project

Run `/obs analyze` in Claude Code (or ask "analyze this project and populate the vault"). The agent scans your repo for README, CLAUDE.md, package manifests, ADRs, and source structure, then writes **populated** vault notes:
```
projects/my-app/
├── my-app.md          # Populated overview with architecture, deps, domain links
├── architecture/
│   └── ADR-0001 Use React Query.md    # Imported from repo
├── components/
│   ├── API Layer.md                    # Extracted from source structure
│   └── Auth Module.md
└── patterns/
    ├── Error Handling.md              # Extracted from CLAUDE.md conventions
    └── Testing Strategy.md
```

### Search vault knowledge

Ask the agent to search your vault for a topic (or use `/obs lookup PKCS12` in Claude Code). Searches across all notes, showing matches with frontmatter context.
Ask the agent to search your vault (or use `/obs lookup PKCS12` in Claude Code). Supports targeted subcommands:
```
/obs lookup deps AuthMiddleware        # What does it depend on?
/obs lookup consumers AuthMiddleware   # What depends on it?
/obs lookup type component my-app      # All components in a project
/obs lookup layer api                  # All API-layer components
```

### Manage relationships

Track dependencies between components (or use `/obs relate` in Claude Code):
```
/obs relate AuthMiddleware SessionStore              # depends-on (default)
/obs relate AuthMiddleware OAuth2Provider implements  # implements relationship
/obs relate show AuthMiddleware                       # View all relationships
/obs relate tree AuthMiddleware 3                     # Dependency tree, depth 3
```

## How It Works

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ Session Start                                    │
│   Agent reads: TODOs → Project Overview          │
│   (2 files, ~100 lines — minimal token cost)     │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ During Work                                      │
│   Project Overview ──link──→ Component Note      │
│        │                         │               │
│        └──link──→ Pattern   ──link──→ Domain     │
│                    Note             Knowledge     │
│   Agent follows links ON DEMAND                  │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│ Session End                                      │
│   Agent writes: Session summary, updates TODOs,  │
│   creates/updates component and pattern notes    │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Vault Structure

The vault is initialized with this structure:

```
AgentMemory/
├── Home.md                           # Dashboard
├── projects/
│   ├── Projects.md                   # Project index
│   └── {name}/
│       ├── {name}.md                 # Project overview — agent starts here
│       ├── architecture/             # ADRs and design decisions
│       ├── components/               # Per-component notes
│       └── patterns/                 # Project-specific patterns
├── domains/
│   ├── Domains.md                    # Domain index
│   └── {tech}/                       # Cross-project knowledge
├── patterns/
│   └── Universal Patterns.md         # Language-agnostic patterns
├── sessions/
│   └── Session Log.md                # Session chronology
├── todos/
│   └── Active TODOs.md               # Current work items
├── templates/                        # Note templates
│   ├── Project.md
│   ├── Component Note.md
│   ├── Session Note.md
│   └── Architecture Decision.md
└── inbox/                            # Unsorted
```

## Package Contents

```
obsidian-agent-memory-skills/
├── .claude-plugin/
│   └── plugin.json                   # Plugin metadata (Claude Code + skills.sh)
├── skills/
│   └── obs-memory/
│       └── SKILL.md                  # Agent-agnostic skill definition (source of truth)
├── commands/
│   └── obs.md                        # Claude Code slash command (/obs)
├── vault-template/                   # Bundled vault template
│   ├── Home.md
│   ├── projects/Projects.md
│   ├── domains/Domains.md
│   ├── patterns/Universal Patterns.md
│   ├── sessions/Session Log.md
│   ├── todos/Active TODOs.md
│   └── templates/
│       ├── Project.md
│       ├── Component Note.md
│       ├── Session Note.md
│       └── Architecture Decision.md
├── setup.sh                          # Shell-based vault setup
└── examples/
    └── populated-vault.md            # Example of a vault after real use
```

## License

MIT
